Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm here with a return guest, Doctor Alberto
Aervi. He's associate professor of sociology at the University
of Trento in Italy. And he's the author of
a new book, uh, Technopanico. I mean, in English,
it would be something like Technopanic Digital Media Between
Reasonable caution and unjustified fears, and we're going to
talk about the book today. So Doctor Aerbi, welcome
back to the show. It's always a pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you. Big pleasure for me, Jay Ricardo.
So let me start with this question. What do
you mean by techno panic by using, I'm using
the word in English here, of course. I mean,
how would you characterize a techno panic?
Yes, techno panic is a, is a word that
has been used a bit in some uh literature
recently to talk about some. Excessive uh fear or
alarmistic narrative about uh technologies and um In the
case of the book is uh specific about uh
communication technologies and in particular about contemporary uh communication
technologies through digital media, social media, smartphone. We know
that there has been a big tension about the,
the, the effect of, uh, social media smartphone on
society and on us. And for some people, including
myself, uh, uh, sometime there has been a kind
of uh Overly negative and alarmistic narrative about the
effect of digital technologies while the image that Came
out from researches at least uh more than once
and so the the term techno panics is exactly
about this, about the fact that uh um. The,
the, this overly alarmistic and negative uh narrative about
uh digital technologies. Then of course, uh there is
a history behind this, uh, this term. For example,
uh, and I talk about this in the, in
the first chapter of the book in, um, sociology,
there is this idea of, uh, moral panics which
are indeed. The, the, uh, uh, the society reacting
for a series of reasons and then I explore
and we can talk about it, uh, a little
bit more in the detail if you want, uh,
but again, the idea is, is negative and, and
not necessarily always, uh, empirically grounded reaction to new
technologies.
Uh, SO in our previous conversation, we talked about
uh cultural evolution. I mean, uh, does this book
and the way you, you, you approach this sort
of panics connect in any way to your work
in cultural evolution?
Yes, I would say, I would say so. I,
I, it connects, I think in, in two ways.
One is I would say more like uh um.
Personal way in the sense uh so I, I
start uh to work about the uh the effect
of digital media using this cultural evolution perspective you're
talking about around 10 years ago or even more
now and um. Just after I started to work
on this, so in, let's say in 2016 there
was the first, uh, Trump election, then there was,
uh, Brexit, then you had all the increase of
populist parties in Europe and everywhere, and in this
time there's also started to be a big backslash
against the social media. We started, you know, the,
the, the, the. The idea of fake news and
misinformation started basically to be very popular in 2016
with Trump election. There was Cambridge Analytica. So while
I was working for my research interest uh related
to cultural revolution to this topic. I could see
that was emerging also all these interests and uh
as I was saying before my impression was from
the beginning that this was not really reflecting what
we would know about, about uh uh about the
effort of social media so. I started to be
interested not only in the, in my, in my,
let's say basic research about, about digital media and
cultural evolution but also I, I started to try
to understand the reason behind this narrative, why this
narrative was there, what were the effect of this
narrative. So there is this link that is, you
know, more personal. Uh, BUT also I think there
is a more, uh, theoretical and, uh, possibly more
interesting, uh, uh, link uh because I think that
if we have, uh, uh, an evolutionary perspective, a
cultural evolutionary perspective, uh. We, we have also a,
a view about how propaganda works, about social influence
work, and I also talk about that, especially in
the. In the, in the second chapter of the
book, and this view has been of course influenced
by other people that you interview like uh like
Hugo Mercier or, or other epistemic vigilance, and the
basic idea is that we are not uh overly
uh gullible, but we tend to be pretty stubborn
that propaganda doesn't work in this automatic way that
sometimes is kind of implicitly assumed when people talk
about the, the, the danger of, uh, of social
media and so on and so. This is a
more um theoretical reason why I think that the
background in evolutionary er social science is important when
we look about, uh, when we look to these,
uh these phenomena. Mhm.
Yes, we're going to talk a little bit later
about how inf influenceable are people really, I mean,
how gullible they are really. But uh before that,
let's just talk a little bit more about moral
panic. So, which do you, would you say are
the aspects of our psychology that explain the development
of moral panics?
Yes, there are, there are several. I, I, I,
I think that the, the, the clearest one are,
uh, uh, a general negative bias. So this is
one of the few results in psychology that are
quite robust, uh, that we can say now, OK,
this, this exists, of course, there is a lot
of variations and contextual factor, but We kind of
know that in general, uh there is a tendency
for everybody again with individual difference and everything, but
there is a tendency to find negative information, more
um attention catching, more memorable, more, uh, cognitively attractive
than uh positive information. This again is really nothing
new we know that. The negative news are more
successful than positive news, but that is, is, I
think part of the, the background of this. So
it's kind of easy to, to, uh, say, oh,
that the smartphone is destroying a generation, the social
media are destroying democracy. This is something that, uh,
uh, traveled very well, especially on social media paradoxically,
and, uh, so this is one. There is a
second aspect that is also I think important which
is uh uh some sort of um We, we
think that the past was better. This is er
also pretty, pretty obvious, but it, it, it can
also be tested uh with the experiment. This is
interesting. I, I mentioned some of the experiments that
try to test this effect. But also a, a,
a feature of these, of these techno panics if
you want that we found, uh, also today with
social media smartphone is like the past was better
like the, the, the idea, the idea of post-truth
era which was very, very common related exactly to
social media in the last in the last, uh,
10 years or so. It's, it presupposes explicitly that,
that, that, that there has been a, a era
of truth. If we are in a post-era there
should, there should have been something before in which
things were better and this again, it's uh, uh,
uh, an idea of a kind of mythical past
which is pretty difficult to defend if we think
about it traditionally, uh, Jonathan Haid, which is one
of the. Most vocal, uh, character in the, in,
in showing that, the, the possible uh danger and
risk of uh smartphone and social media usage, especially
for, for, uh, teenagers and young people. Is, is
also, is also often, you know. Talking about the
importance of uh free games like the, like having
the kids going in the, in the, in the,
in the, in the countryside in the past, which
again, it's, it's in a way, it's kind of
reasonable. The, the, the, the, the interesting point here
is that a, a feature of this techno panics
is to have a, a, a reference to an
era in the past in which things were, were
better. And then of course uh uh so the
these are kind of psychological background of this of
this idea but then you have also a series
of features of this uh uh moral panic or,
or techno panics. So I, I used in the
book the as I was saying before, the concept
of, of moral panics that is a moral sociological
concept. Um, THIS is from a, a sociologist's called,
uh, Stanley Cohen of a few, a few decades
ago, and, um, so he was studying some the,
the, the, the reaction of media and, uh, and
of the, the, the general population about some uh.
Uh YOUTH disorder that were happening in the UK
in the early 60s and um he, he was
the first one, let's say, well, he, he was
lucky to invent the term moral panic, but also
was the first one to really focus on the
fact that uh these disorders were not really. Major,
uh, didn't create major problems, but still the reaction
of the, uh, of the, uh, of the media
and of the population was clearly, clearly, uh, bigger
than what was the problem and he started to
try to understand what were the reason related to
this. So for example, the way to, to easily
find some, uh, scapegoat about some more complex societal
problem. Uh, FINDING some generalized water maybe local problem
too big, uh, too big, um, to like all
the world problems. So maybe social media usage is
problematic for someone, but we say social media is
destroying a generation. So this you, you make bigger
the, the problem. So there are a series of
features that are then, uh, characterize Hispanic. For the
psychological reason and I was saying you have this
negativity, you have this uh nostalgia for the past
and they kind of go together to create a
very uh attractive story.
Yeah, I mean, it's very interesting because there are
two aspects here that are not new at all.
I mean, first of all, people claiming that the
younger generation or generations have some sort of problem
that they are decadent or they are degenerates or
As the new practices they have or the new
technologies they use, they, uh, their moral character is
weaker or they, uh, and, uh, also moral panic
surrounding new technology like, I mean, I've heard about
moral panics, uh, regarding writing romance novels, the radio,
the TV, video games, so. I mean this, this
seems to be just part of a very old
historic trend among people, right?
Yes, absolutely. So, uh, in, in, again I, I
go through some of these, of these moral panics
related to, uh, communication technology because this is the
topic and as you say, we have like from,
from the writing itself, uh, to the radio. Uh,
TV video game, so there is, is a kind
of a recurrent pattern that we, we, we can,
uh, we can see, um. There are, again, there
are some uh good reason in a way I
would say good in a sense of we, we
can understand why this happens. So I, I talked
about the psychological reason but it's also uh a
fact that these uh new technologies, new communication technologies
have a strong impacts on our society. So it's,
it's normal in a way that we can, we
can be uh worried about that. I, I will
give you just the example, for example, the printing
press, that's, you know, seems to be a technology
that we would say, OK, it's books are not
that dangerous, but, uh, but of course they are.
Books are very dangerous and when the printing press
appeared, it, it, it's reasonable that people were worried
and is, is nice because I did that. I
mean, it's not my, my main topic, but I
did a bit of research about the, you know,
the reaction on the printing press and when you
read these things seems to read the like uh
it, it could have been written 10 years ago.
People are worried about the spread of misinformation, who
is uh checking if what is written in these
books is true or not. And uh and it's
quite interesting because it's true that the, the printing
press was a disruptive technologies that could potentially have
negative effect. What I think that we need to
learn from history in this case is that the,
the introduction of new technologies, any kind of technologies
is in general, I, I, I say in the
book a process of adaptation, co-adaptation. So in generally,
people that, that tend to feel. Very strongly this
new technology thing that the technology arrived, it changes
everything. We are kind of society's kind of passive
and is molded by the, the new technology, but
this is not usually what happens, uh, for example,
in the case of the printing press, there are,
uh, innovations that follow the printing press to manage,
for example, the fact that there are. Many new
books, uh, people invented the, the index at the
end of the book, so it, it's, it's a
way when you have a lot of information you
need to find a way to organize the information.
So this is an adaptation to the increasing information.
It's that, I mean, again is a bit is
a bit, uh, uh, niche, but there are some
interesting stuff about how, uh, annotating books changed from.
Uh, BEFORE and after the invention of the printing
press, so, or even before with manuscript we annotated
by, by readers or monks or whatever, but after
when, when, when you start to have a big
circulation of books, the, the way you annotate books,
it changed because it became a way to, uh,
summarize and synthesize information. So that there is, it's
always a process and, and I think that uh
Even now something like this uh is happening and
it will happen that's, that's, uh, and then I
think this is so the the let let's say
that the election from the past technologies is not
too much to say it is it already happened.
So I mean it could be different now but
I think that the important lesson is that uh
we need to remember how thing uh change and
that is not just a a a deterministic um.
Introduction of the new technologies, but it's a process
of adaptation between society and technology.
So I would like to get into the topic
or the specific panic surrounding online misinformation, but just
before that, let me ask you more broadly. I
mean, people have this very common idea, or at
least people who deal with or talk about online
misinformation have this very an idea that people are
extremely gullible and whatever kind of information they are
exposed to, whatever they read, they watch, they listen
to, they will fall for it. But I mean,
how influenable or how gullible are people
really. Yes, that's a million dollar question that they
say. The, the, the, the short answer is, I
think less than what we tend to think. Uh,
I, I, I try to give a bit longer
answer. Well, first, one interesting thing that uh, that
is related to this is that, uh, uh, which
is kind of curious. We, we tend to think
that other people are gullible, not much ourselves. So
we actually did a, a study about this with,
uh, with Sasha Chai. So we, um, we wanted
to. Understand what kind of beliefs were linked to
this idea that misinformation is very dangerous and it's
very widespread so we had our participant to answer
to this question about misinformation and also about a
series of uh uh other other question about you
know if they were. Worried about the status of
the world if they were thinking, sorry, that they
were not really good at detecting misinformation, if they
were thinking that others were not really good a
series of questions. And uh what we found was
that the, the, the most consistent correlation because it's
a, is a correlational study but the most consistent
belief that was correlated with the thinking that misinformation
was a a a big problem was exactly the
idea that uh. Other people were gullible, basically, it's
called in, in psychology, it's called sometimes first person
effort is that the, the other people have, are
really socially influenceable but we are not. So that's
a kind of another uh pretty consistent pattern like
I was saying about the negativity bias. So it's
something that seems to be pretty robust in different
study. And I think say something about the fact
that uh our uh intuitive ideas about uh social
influence are not super good so we tend to
think that other are we not too much and
then going more on the, on the, you know,
on the science about that as I was saying
before. Uh, I'm coming from, from cultural evolution. Uh,
IN classic cultural evolution there is this idea of,
um, what are called social learning strategies or transmission
biases. So the idea is that we do not
copy at random, but we have some. Kind of,
uh, general heuristic like a copy, the majority, let's
say copy from prestigious people copy certain content and
not added. So this is a kind of a
first level so we don't just, we are not
just a random influence them. Uh, BUT I think
that one can, uh, go a bit further than
that. So, mm, in, in, in the previous book
in Cultural Revolution in the digital age, I was
actually trying to understand whether these, uh, these, uh,
heuristic, these, uh, these strategies were possibly, uh, deleterious
in online dynamics because, you know, if we copy
prestigious people we could just follow some influencer or
some politician. But I was saying that this. Didn't
seem to be the case and uh and in
this past year I tried to go on in
this in this direction and for example we found
that in general um. Not only people do not
use much these uh strategies, but also in the,
in the Cultural Revolution literature, we found that that
people do not copy other even when they should.
So we did a uh like a Sort of,
sort of reviews of uh uh experiment of, in
which people could use social learning or individual learning.
And um what, what we found is that uh
People are just, at least in this experiment made
by research and in cultural evolution that we tasting
the, the optimal social learning usage, but participants were
not doing it, so people in experiments tended to
be uh stubborn instead of being too gullible. And
then when you start to look uh uh in,
in various literature, you find that this is a
bit of a pattern. So there are studies about
the fact that advertisements do not work that much.
So if you put together the effect of advertisement,
some work very well and usually people remember the
effective advertisement, some do not, and so the effect
tend to be zero. Studies about in, uh, in
sociology, about the fact that people tend to. Basically
not change too much their idea during their life
course they they say about the stable disposition model
so that people do not change too much and
so can this of provide a different, a different
picture of uh social influence and then again uh
in in in this in this my, this my,
my, my. My, my research, I arrived to this
idea, as I was saying before I was mentioned
in the work of, uh, Hugo Mercier or, or
the people in Paris about epistemic vigilance, which is,
uh, um, again is an evolutionary approach to, uh,
social influence but is a bit more, let's say
strict than what would be standard cultural evolution. Now
I, I don't enter in the detail of this
approach. I'm sure that. You already talk with them
and so you would,
yeah, I've, I've have, I've had Hugo Murcia and
Dan Sperber on the show,
yeah, exactly, exactly, and, and I think to me
at the moment this seemed to be the, the,
the theoretical framework that at least in my ideas
seem to describe to explain better what we see
in reality. And uh and um which of course
doesn't mean that we do not change our mind,
but it means that the way we change our
mind is not by seeing a few fake news
or uh because of political propaganda, but we need
to take into account much. More, uh, many factors
and, uh, and so on and so let's say
going, going to, to, to, to, to, to the,
the, the topic, the, the techno panic topic with
this background let's say, OK, we are not that
gullible changing our mind is not that easy, um.
It, it, it, it gives you some, some, some,
uh, perspective to look at all the aspects that,
you know, from, uh, microtargeting to misinformation to the
effect on, on mental health they say OK, but
maybe they're not so direct and so, uh, so,
so, so clear as they are sometimes presented in
the, in the, in the narrative. Mhm.
So, but let me ask you then, what do
we know about the availability of online disinformation? Because
again, people who write on this topic, uh, I
mean, not everyone, of course, but many people, popular
writers who write on this topic, uh, tend to
present it as a moral panic in the sense
that, oh, online disinformation is everywhere and it influences
a lot of people and it spreads. It's very
easily. I mean, what do we know about that?
Is it really the case that it is, there's
lots of disinformation on the internet and that it
spreads very easily? Like, for example, even just during
the, the last pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic, at a
certain point, some people were panicking because apparently they
thought that many people suddenly were anti-vaxxers. I mean,
is that really the case or not?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's, that's, that's uh excellent. Uh,
NO, it's not. So it's uh, it's, and again,
it, it, it, it's strange because it, it was
uh kind of surprising for me when I started
to study these things as I was saying before,
say 2016 when everybody was talking about, uh, uh,
you know, social media is full of misinformation, the
internet is full of misinformation. The few studies that
started to appear, they were saying, OK, that's, that's
not the case. I mean, the, the, the, the
majority, of course, the, the point is that obviously
if you go online you can find all the
misinformation that you want. I can just now Google
for, uh, Bill Gates, uh, whatever was doing with
the vaccine or whatever, yeah, yeah, the,
the chips on the vaccine chips,
yeah. I, I, I would find thousands or millions
of pages and various versions. So, so obviously it's
there. The point is that we need to, if
we want to assess the quantity of misinformation, we
need to assess it in the context of the
total quantity of information. So this would be the,
the numerator of a fraction in which the denominator
is all the information that we can find online.
When we look at this, at it in this
way, then it's always like uh. Few percentage points.
Of course, it depends. There are many ways to
measure it. It's, it's an open problem and, and,
uh, um, still the, the results, I think now
give a, a, a story that I think everybody
would agree that if we look at the quantity
of uh misinformation is always very very limited also
because the the majority of people uh tend to
look at the mainstream uh mainstream uh things that
usually do not have a big incentive to to
uh to share misinformation uh. It's also generally um
like the people that are a lot of online
they will also consume and share more misinformation but
they would consume and share more of everything so
that's that's again a problem of uh uh of
um. You know, you, you have to put this
in relation between the total activity or the total
quantity of information. So this is about, about the
quantity. Um, WE don't have any strong uh support
of the idea that uh misinformation is more effective
to spread than uh true information. In fact, it's
um. Intuitive to think that uh uh true information
is more likely to, to spread than false information
and in this case the intuition is probably correct
um so there's, there's nothing really. I, I mean
I discussed a a a famous paper that was,
that was uh uh proposing this idea but I
think it's not uh uh we have strong support
for that. The, the main point though is, um,
the idea that one could say, OK, even if
there is not much misinformation could have some strong
effect on people. It could, but the, the, the
point is that, uh, nobody really knows, and, uh,
so the people that claim this are just assuming
that this is the case. Uh, IT'S obviously very
difficult to measure the, the efforts. So what what
I'm saying here is just that, uh, uh, we
don't know and then. If we have a a
perspective like the one I have so about an
evolutionary perspective, the safe assumption is to say that
probably there is not much effort. What is, what
is worrying is that still now people tend to
conflate. Consumption of misinformation and change of uh uh
beliefs of ideas so people are exposed to misinformation
so you see you you don't uh you are
uh anti-vaccination because you saw some misinformation to me
it's usually the, the, the, the causal chain doesn't
go in this direction so you are, uh, opposite
to the vaccine for complicated, uh. Um, REASON that
can be your, your, uh, related to your, uh,
economical and social background, to your belief, uh, and
your trust in, uh, institution and in politics, so
you're also skeptical about vaccines. So you see some,
uh, our friend, uh, Bill Gates and the, and
the chip, and you just, uh. Engage or share
with this misinformation not because you change your belief,
not to have other change belief because it would
not work, but you just signaling, I look at
this. I, I'm against the government so I think
that's, that would be a more plausible explanation of
why some people would do this. And, uh, and,
uh, so, so I, I, I really think that,
uh, that, then we can talk more about the,
the, the, the more deeper ethical problem about the
fight against the misinformation, but for, for staying on
the, on the empirical uh part. I think there
has been a lot of uh not uh not
uh really robust um fear about misinformation and about
the effect, about the quantity, about the, the, the
changing people's mind that is really not uh not
very robust from the empirical point of view.
But do you think there are any aspects of
disinformation we should worry about, and do you think
that we should do something to fight it, and
if so, how?
OK, that's, that's a complicated question. I, I, I,
I, of course, some aspect of misinformation are, are
not, uh, so, so like, like, let's, let's use
again the example of the vaccine misinformation. So this,
this is, uh, this is, uh, uh, we, we
don't want it, so. The point is that as
I would put the, the thing, what, what we
don't want is the people to be against the
vaccine. This, we agree that we don't want, we
want that people uh would uh again I'm let,
let, let, let's. Keep aside all the debates about
the vaccine. Just, just say, OK, vaccinate is good.
We agree on that. Uh, WE do want that
people, uh, do it. Um, AND we, we have
to fight for this, but I don't think we
have to, to fight for this. Uh, uh, WE
cannot just fight against the, the misinformation on the
vaccine. We have to, uh, make these people not
receptive to this misinformation, and this misinformation will disappear.
So I think that what we have to fight
for is more the. Uh, THE demand for misinformation
and the production because, you know, if the, we
can do all the fight of misinformation that we
want to try to avoid this, but if the
demand will be there. Somehow the demand will be
satisfied in, in, in somewhere in social media or
in the internet so we, we, we used to
say that misinformation is more a symptom than a
cause of something so. Yes, we want to fight
something that appears as misinformation, but the, the, the
way to fight it is not to fight misinformation,
but is to fight the reason why people would
be sensitive or willing to accept this misinformation. So
I think that's, that's, and, and, and I think
really this is a, a, a key point because.
You know, think, uh, let, let, let's leave on
the side and vaccine case, but like people focused
for, for, uh, in the first Trump election to
say, OK, we have to. Trump was elected by
with the fake news that they were called at
the moment, so we have to fight, uh, misinformation.
And uh we're still there so maybe maybe we
had to find something else uh and and uh
and so yeah I, I, I think we we
need to be careful to, to this is an
easy way to, to, you know, we, you have
something that you don't like and you identify and
this is another big feature of techno panics so
we don't like Trump, let's say, and so we
say OK, it's easy to identify. The problem in
the misinformation is May be easy to uh fight
it, but if we are not identifying the real
problem, the social, the cultural, the economic cause, we
are a bit of uh wasting our time.
So, uh, a topic that is somewhat related to
misinformation but is not exactly the same, at least
psychologically. Uh, LET'S talk a little bit about conspiracy
theories. So, um, how, how do conspiracy theories come
about? I mean, what aspects of our psychology explain
them and are conspiracy theories necessarily irrational?
Yes, that's, that's another interesting point, so. There has
been also in this case, I think a sort
of Panics about the relationship between social media and
conspiracy theories, this idea that, uh, uh, the world
is full of, uh, conspiracies now, uh, this also,
I think, is the same feature of what you
already said about, uh, uh, misinformation. So not, uh,
strong, uh, empirical uh support, at least, uh, uh,
uh, dubious empirical support. Uh, UNCLEAR causal link between
believing in a conspiracy theory and changing behaviors and
ideas. Uh, CONSPIRACY theories do exist. They existed for,
uh, centuries or millennia, as you were saying, conspiracy
theories, they exist and they are. Up to a
point relatively common because they do um have some,
some psychological function. For example, they have uh um
epistemic uh functions so they make us, you know,
it's, it's the world is a very complicated place
and they are uh usually simple way to, uh,
understand the, uh, events that are complicated. Let's, let's
use again the, the, the COVID example. It's very.
Difficult to, to know what exactly happened, but if
you say, you know, some, some, uh, whatever, uh,
produce it on purpose and throw it around is
explained, uh, give you like an epistemic value they
have social value so, um, beside knowing and understanding,
give us an explanation that, uh, uh, make the,
the, the. The complexity of, of uh, of events
in a way that you can understand and say
OK that's that's why this happened so, so there
are a lot of reasons. Um, SO it's not
surprising that they are around. Uh, THE question is,
is there any special relationship within social media or
there has been an increase in social with in
the past year because of social media of beliefs
in, uh, conspiracy theories. And again, this is not,
uh, clear. So again, the, the, the, the, the
post-true era, it's, it's a bit, uh, problematic. Conspiracy
theories were there before. It's even more difficult here
than measuring misinformation like calculating the proportion of beliefs
in conspiracy theories in 60 years ago. It's, it's
very complicated, but some people tried, uh, tried to
do the, the Joe Sinski and the group. And
when you look at this again it doesn't seem
that there is a clear pattern in which they,
they increase of course social media are, uh, conspiracy
theories spreads on social media because everything spread on
social media so you will not be, uh, surprised
about that. In the book I discuss the fact
that maybe this is a pretty speculative. I found
it interesting though that uh. One aspect of conspiracy
theories is that uh um people that believe the
conspiracy theory can somehow, somehow participate in the construction
of the theory. He, a, a good example is
uh QA on the, the, the story. I don't
know if you remember the, the, um, I mean
now is a bit quieter but there was this
queue that was. Putting drops online that had to
be interpreted by the, the, the, and, and I
think this is an interesting case because uh in
this case there is a link with social media
you could do this only on social media uh
50 years ago would have been a problem for
you to have people to collaborate in this creation
of the conspiracy because how would you do it
you can do it in your. Uh, YOU know,
cafe or something, but would have not been very
effective. So in a way I think social media
makes this collaborative construction of conspiracy theories maybe, uh,
easier. So maybe they can change some features of
the conspiracy theories, but there has been a, a,
a. There has been an increase because of social
media is, is not, uh, is not clear again
they are there and I think if I can
add the, the, the, the logic to me is
the same of misinformation so we, we see them
and, uh, you know. Now we can again look
for a weird conspiracy theory online and we see
them 50 years ago we had to to go
and check with weird publications or with the with
people. Well now I, I call it availability so
everything is there, everything can be measured and counted
so it appears that oh the world is very
weird, but maybe it was weird or weirder even
before we just didn't know because we were in
our. Uh, WE, we didn't have the access to
this information. Mhm.
So, let me ask you about another very common
claim that people make, that online and particularly on
social media, we live in echo chambers and there's
filter filter bubbles, and so basically we're, what people
are saying is that The sort of information diet
we get online is very biased and tailored to
our own beliefs, our own political beliefs and other
kinds of beliefs, and so we don't really get
exposed to uh contrary views. We don't really get
exposed to information that contradicts or that would tell
us something different than what we already believe in.
I mean, is that really the case?
Yeah, this has been another, another big, uh big
fear related to social media game that has been,
you know, social media start to be widespread and
you have Trump and you have populist Party and
you have Brexit, and so as in the case
of uh misinformation and conspiracy theories, it It was
natural to, to, to, to, to link the two
things, social media and these increasing people uh believing
things that we didn't like we in this case,
you know, I'm an academic liberal professor of sociology,
so I'm like, oh wow. But, uh, even in
this case I think it's, it's, uh, and, and
I, I would say that now in this. Uh,
IT, it, it, it kind of the fashion of
the echo chambers on the internet can, kind of
went down, I think, and again, even in this
case, the, the, the basic idea is plausible, so
we know that the algorithm would give us, uh,
uh, on average similar things to what we already
like uh we can create, we can choose to
follow someone and not follow some other. Availability also
this is is very good because if you look
at the, the transmission of information in a social
network you would obviously find clusters that tend to
communicate more within than with the external and so
this was another idea that was very uh popular
and I think uh again not very, very well
grounded and indeed the the more studies that happened
they showed that uh um. The the the. The
the echo chamber in nature of social media is
less echo chamber than what people would would think
that uh. That when you compare especially the situation
in social media and not in social media in,
in say offline life, uh, echo chambers and polarization
are also present so um you know, traditional media
are as much if not more polarized than than
the social media, uh. Daily, daily interaction are also
very polarized. The group of friends that we have
are not usually, uh, very, very different from a
political point of view. Uh, EVEN in, in, in,
in Technopanic in the book I talk about also
the example of, uh, like, like geographic. POLAR polar
uh polarizations like like people live in different neighbors
without even thinking about social media. You just, you
know, there are neighbors for a rich and leftist
people and whatever so it's, it's, I, I, I,
I think the picture is much, much more complicated.
And, and to me now this seems really like
uh not the case, but there is a, I,
I think a nice example is what happened now
with the, with the um the, the division, the
Blue Sky and I like it. I mean, people
aid to create their own echo chambers because uh
social media were too much mixing people so you
say, OK, I want to refund. So, so it's
the opposite of the idea of uh like the,
it, it's probably social media that, that they were
giving too much diversity and so people had to
say, OK, I don't want this diversity. I prefer
my, which is again. Reasonable, uh, for many points
of view, but it's really the opposite of, of,
uh, what the, the echo chambers idea would predict.
And another aspect here that I think is important
is that This this is really an example in
which and, and I think is a problem in
general for studies of, uh, social media is that
they are, uh, generally US centric. So in, in
US there has been clearly an increase in polarization
in the last, uh, actually it predates social media.
The increase in polarization is in the last decades,
um, and then of course you, you link these
two things. Uh, THE point is, is less clear
that the same effort has been in other countries
where of course you still had the, uh, the
diffusion of, uh, social media, but you didn't have
the same, um, the same increasing polarization and so
again this is the same problem I was telling
before about, uh, fake news is easy to say,
OK. There is a problem we don't like the
increasing polarization. Let's identify an easy target, echo chambers
in social media, uh, but, but, uh, you know,
sometimes this cannot be, be the right way to
do it.
So another very common thing that we've heard even
in recent years from very notable people like Tristan
Harris and others where they say that algorithms know
us better than we know ourselves and that we
can, for example, predict someone's personality. Done what they
do on social media, and if, for example, you
go on Netflix or on Amazon or on, on
YouTube, they also, they always know you better than
yourself and they always suggest content for you to
watch that before you know you want to watch
it. Something along those lines. Is, is that really
true?
Uh, WELL, I mean, it is a bit true,
of course, I mean, of course, there is a
lot of uh data that can be collected on
our activities and of course they tell something about
us and about our, our inclinations and it, it,
it, our behavior can be up to a point
predictable if we use our activities. Um, SO, so,
on, on this, I, I'm pretty, I'm, I'm saying,
OK, yeah, we, we have to be careful about
this, uh, this, what, what we are doing online
about how our data are, are, uh, who, who
can have access to our data. So I think
this is, this is true. Uh, THE point for
me is what are the consequences of this. So,
um, if, if we go from this to the
fact that some, uh. Magic, uh, algorithm can change
our political ideas or our behaviors, then, then it's
a problem. The problem is there. So, um, something
can be predicted, um, up to a point I
think this is OK. So it's good if, if
we have some personalization, for example, in, in. Uh,
YOU know, if Amazon advised me some new books
to buy, that's, I mean, the, the, the, the,
the, the catalog of Amazon or the, or the,
the, the, the, the amount of things that are
online would be an algorithm should, should somehow do
something, otherwise we cannot have a random search in
this, uh, big search space. It's just that. An
impossible problem. Um, I have to say, this is,
I, I'm talking as a, as a, as a
normal guy. Uh, MY, my feeling is that they
are not that effective. They, I think the personalization
algorithm should be more effective. I think in the
book, I do this example when, when we moved
in Toronto, I bought a, uh, mattress for the
bed from IKEA. And then I had the 4
weeks like advertisement of mattress of the bed so
it's not that I'm opening a hotel or something.
I bought my mattress, so it's like a not
super smart algorithm should have this or you buy,
you know, some Chinese food and then always sell
it. I, I don't know, it seems pretty, pretty
nothing for I, I never failed to be so
like scared about this, the power of the algorithm.
Say so, it's true to, to, as I was
saying before that, that there is some predictive power
that have been studies that they think about quite
a reasonable that, you know, can predict, for example,
the uh up to a point your personality traits
based on, on your social media activity which is
uh. Uh, REASONABLE, and, uh, it's, it's something that
is quite interesting as I was saying, what can
you do with that, uh, even in this case
again there is the, the, the alarmistic narrative that,
you know, Cambridge Analytica with the, the psychographic, I
think was the term, uh, psychographic was like, you
know, taking the data that having people change their
vote that Brexit was, uh, was due to. To
impart at least to the activity of Cambridge Analytica.
Again, I, I repeat the same story. When we
look at the, at the studies that try to,
to, to look on the, um, for example, the
persuasive effect of uh microtargeting. I, I, how do
you say in English, micro targeting or micro targeting?
Uh,
I usually say micro targeting. I mean, maybe there
are people who say micro targeting. I'm not
sure. I don't know. I, I, I live in
Italy now. I'm forgetting my English. Uh, LET'S say
micro targeting, uh, what, what studies that look at
the effect of microtargeting, political microtargeting. Mhm. Usually, as
I, for all, I mean, I, I have the
same pattern, but they, they don't find uh strong
effort. The effort seems very small and very context-dependent.
Of course, there are studies that show that if
I, if I have some information of your personality
and I put like an advertisement uh related to
the personality, maybe you click a bit more on
this than on the other, that is the opposite.
But going from there to the effect of political
uh microtargeting is really, again, I'm not saying in
this case that uh we know that it doesn't
work. I'm saying that uh we don't know whether
it works. And this is, is very, is very
uh different with the narrative that we have about
the, the power of the algorithms that are changing
our idea and The same logic, I think again
when you look at this, then you are not
looking at the uh more real problem. So like
the, the, the, the Cambridge Analytica scandals, if you
think that, that um changed the result of Brexit
and the power of psychographic advertisement, but then. OK,
maybe let's look at why, uh, Brexit happened more
let's look about the why, uh, the usage of
data in Cambridge Analytica, what was the problem? What
was OK, what was not. If we say they
are destroying the world, we are not really even
criticizing well these, uh, these big corporations, so. Again,
the, the, my, my, my, my more uh nuanced
uh um view is not to say everything is
good and they are doing good. It's, I think
that it's not effective to have this catastrophic and
overly negative, uh, narrative.
So another very common claim, and because I mean,
I spent some time on YouTube also because of
my work, I, I've heard over the past few
years many people talking about rabbit holes and that
people can fall into rabbit holes on social media
and. YouTube particularly, and there are even videos of
people on YouTube talking about how they fell into
a uh alt-right rabbit hole, for example. I mean,
is that, uh, really something supported by the evidence
that something can that uh like that can happen
on social media?
Again, that's, that's the thing. So this is a,
uh, a relatively plausible story, you know, you have
people spend a lot of time on YouTube. Uh,
YouTube advise you other videos and maybe videos that
are more emotionally. Uh, STRONG,
compelling, yeah,
sorry,
um, emotionally compelling,
yeah, exactly, it can be advised more by the
algorithms. There is an increase in, uh, in, uh,
again, the alt-right or whatever for young people. So
that's, that's a very good story. It, it's plausible.
It's a very, uh, make us feel well because
you say, OK, these are good guys. Society is
good, but YouTube is making them going in this
direction. Uh, AGAIN, in this case, uh, there is
about, I mean, usually when you, when you, when
you read about these rabbit hole is generally. You
know, uh, single stories of some people that tells
the story about this, which I mean, I, I,
I don't have a doubt that this story are,
are, uh, real and honest. The point is when
we try to study this with experiments, uh, or
with, with data, it's also very, very, uh, unclear
if there is an effort. In, in the book
I talk about, uh, an experiment they did with
uh what they call, um. Counterfactual bots so they
had some, some bots being trained on the um
because what is difficult in this case is to
distinguish the effect of personal uh usage, personal choices
and the algorithms of course people that go towards
alt right will look at more alt right video,
but it's because they want to or it's because
the algorithm that uh uh push them that, that's
another very difficult question. This, this, this experiment, they
have these counterfactual bots. They were trained on the
um viewing history of real individuals and then at
some point, the, the bots were just following blindly
because it's a bot. The, the, the algorithmic recommendation.
And the users will keep on doing their own
stuff so you can, in this case, you can
compare the, the pure algorithmic recommendation and not the
pure user but user plus algorithmic. If the pure
algorithmic com if the, the, the rabbit hole theory
is correct. The pure algorithmic recommendation should push you
more toward the extreme and uh and again in
this study they found the opposite so they found
that uh the algorithmic recommendation tend to stay where
they were or even go to our more moderate
videos while users were going in their whatever relation
some case in some case toward more extreme view.
And this makes sense because the algorithms usually give
you, OK, uh, emotionally compelling content but also generally
give you content that is already popular and content
that is already popular is mainstream video and, and,
and again of course it happens that sometime you
have, uh, you know, the, the Andrew Tate or
whatever that get very big. Um, BUT I, I,
I think it's interesting because when it happens, everybody
talk about it, so it's not the, what happens
in YouTube, what happened in social media, it's sometimes
this happens, so we are like all, uh, worried,
but when we look at the general pattern, this
is not the case. And even in this case
to understand why some, some young people go to
the alt-right or whatever they go mm. The, the,
the, the rabbit hole uh hypothesis is to me
a bit of a shortcut and a scapegoat to
say, OK, we just, uh, we just, if the,
the algorithm would be different, uh, every, everybody would
be happy which is uh Uh, strange way to
put things for me. Mhm.
So, uh, let me ask you now about uh
the correlation or even the causation some people have
been making between social media use and mental health
outcomes. I mean, even last year, we've had a
new book come out by Jonathan Haidt, The Anxious
Generation. I mean, it, it really didn't convince me
at all, and I I read some critiques of
it and it seems that many of the claims
he makes, there are not really well supported by
the evidence and there were some poor studies cited
there. But I mean, let's go step by step
here. First of all, uh, how can social media
use and its supposed effect on mental health be
properly measured?
That's a difficult question. How can we properly measure?
We don't know. Uh, WHAT we know is that,
uh, uh, a lot of people, including me and
some of my colleagues and other people are trying
to, uh, do this. And um I think if
we are honest we should say that is very
difficult and that so far even in this case
there is not a a clear results that go
in any direction so I, I mean on this
I I am I am. You know, quite open
to see what happened. I, I, I'm happy to
if we will meet in an interview in, uh,
other 5 years. I'm happy to say, OK, I
want to see other 5 years of research and
I may change my mind on this. I, I'm
pretty, I'm pretty happy to say in the other,
I think I, I, I would bet all my
money on this. I'm like, let's see what happens.
But we can say what is happening now and
uh the situation didn't change from when I finished
the book one year ago or so is that
uh we don't have a clear uh there is
the first problem is the, the, the existence and
strength of the correlation between social media usage or
smartphone usage and mental health. So some study. Some
studies found uh correlation, um, some didn't. uh, THERE
are several problems. One is that usually these correlations
are very, very, uh, small, which by itself is
OK. Human behavior and societies are complicated stuff, so
small efforts are perfectly fine. Uh, THE problem is
that uh these small efforts are also linked to
the fact that, uh, as, as you were saying,
it's very difficult to measure, uh, both social media
usage or smartphone usage or digital technology usage and,
uh, mental health. So you can ask people, uh,
how many social media do they have in their
account, how many hours they spend on social media.
Uh, HOW many hours they spend on the smartphone,
do they have a smartphone or not. There are
many. Mental health is the same. You can ask
them, you can look at the. Medical prescription, uh,
and the problem is that when you put this
thing together, you can find always something, um, so
we need to be very, very careful. To me
it seems that yes, it's plausible that there is
some, some small negative correlation, but even if there
is, there is a big discrepancy between this very
small effect, if there is. And like the, the,
the destroying a generation uh thing and, and this
is just the first aspect. This is the aspect
about the the correlation. Then the second aspect is
about the, the, the causality. So what is, I
mean, it, it's equally plausible that people that uh
uh for any reason have a worse mental health
would use more smartphones and social media. Than the
opposite that that that is the usage of social
media or smartphone to cause mental health and uh
even in this case again I, I'm, I'm not
saying that I am sure that uh it's not
the case. I'm sure that people that say that
they are sure they are uh a bit cheating
I think because it, it's, it's really, it's really
difficult to do experiments that taste properly this quisition,
um. Because, uh, because it's very difficult, so you,
you, you have this, for example, this, this deactivation
experiment. So you ask a person to say not
use, uh, a smartphone or a social media for
a certain period of time and then you measure
the difference, uh, so you indeed these are kind
of like standard experiments so you have a control
group, you can do your stats, everything, but, uh,
of course, uh, we. How, how, how common, uh,
is this conversation in society if someone asks me
to not use my phone for a week, I
kind of have very strong expectation of how I
would feel and what I would say is very
difficult to see if these data are very reliable
and then it's just one week. What, what does
it mean to not have it or have it?
I mean just one week or one month or
one day can be a little holiday from, from
the. Social media, it's, it's just complicated and, and
again it's, it's um. Also, I mean, in, in
a, in a, in a situation in which everybody
use uh social media or smartphone is very difficult
to measure if there is maybe and and now
I'm saying something against my point so like maybe
uh even if a person use it not too
much if everybody around them use it they will
also have a negative effort so you cannot measure.
So what I'm saying is that uh. To me,
the, the, the best, uh, best guess that we
can have is that, that we don't know now,
uh, so it's good to have up to a
point some, some, uh, be, be careful about that,
but that, that we don't want to go on
the extreme and, and present this thing as, as
that we know and that we need to have
strong, uh, strong reaction to this because. And I'm
repeating myself, this could also have uh by itself
a negative effect. We don't know what would happen
if we take out. I'm, I'm almost uh uh.
Interested. So in Australia there will be a ban
for um less than 16 year old of uh
social media starting I think in the 10th of
December. You know, can be a, maybe we will
know more. I, I'm, I'm happy to see, to
see what happened.
Yeah, I mean, but there are two other points
here that I think could be a little bit
problematic. I mean, one of them has to do
even with the claim. That uh teen mental health
is getting worse over time because I've heard and
read people questioning that claim and they look at
the data and say that there's not really good
enough evidence to really make the claim or be
sure that teen mental health is getting worse over
time or over the past 15 years or so
because usually people Start in 2010 with the introduction
of smartphones and uh the uh widespread social media
and so on, and then even if it's getting
worse, I think that, and uh please tell me
if you agree with this point or not, but
I think that uh trying to create this unifactorial
narrative based just on social media use is not
helpful because There are many other factors that could
be playing a role here, like, for example, an
uncertain future for young people having to do with,
for example, climate change, the job market, the economy,
and so on. I mean, there are many other
aspects that could be playing a role here if,
if mental health is getting worse,
right? Yes, but it's much easier to say that
it's a smartphone. You know, it's more difficult to
solve the job market and climate change where the
smartphone you can say just OK, don't use the
smartphone until you are 16 and uh you feel
good about that. No, uh, excellent point. I, I
completely agree. So, uh, first thing, uh, that is
really true that there is this decline in mental
health, um. Again, one aspect is that usually as
you were saying, people take the last 20 years
of data and they observe something like this. Even
in the US if you take say the last
40 or 50 years, you have kind of some,
some ups. And down and if you look at
all the data, there's nothing special in these last
uh 20 years. People were, uh for example, much
uh worse in the early 90s. I don't know.
I, I remember that now. I don't remember the
exact data, but if you look, it's nothing special
now. So, um this is also not clear and
again, as I was saying before, this is all
about US data. Uh, IT'S less clear if this
happens in another country, um. Seen kind of in
the UK, for example, is less in Italy or
in more South European country. So it's, it's not
obvious this, and the second aspect that you were
saying which I completely agree is this, as you
were saying this mono, uh, mono causal explanation, uh,
of course there are so many possible other reasons.
I mean all that you say, uh, the fact
that there has been, uh, uh. In some country,
and these are the country in which you observe
more clearly, uh, uh, this, this, uh, this effect,
uh, a change also in the social, uh, fabric
of the societies and, uh, which I think it's,
uh, more problematic and interesting also than just the,
the, the, the, the smartphone. Um, THAT there has
been, uh, uh, the, the, the way in which,
uh, mental health is, uh, categorized changes a lot,
so it's, uh, it's, uh, now, uh, which is
good, but, uh, uh, it can have some effort
now it's kind of more OK to say that
you have, uh, uh, some. Some problem than maybe
20 years ago again that's good but could could
create these efforts so uh also this part is
not is not uh foolproof so we need to
be careful when we do big claim but again
these big claims tend to be very. Very attractive
for, for, for the reason I was saying before,
they are negative. They talk about uh when I
was younger, we didn't use the smartphone. Uh, THEY
find easy solution to problems that are complex and
are scary. So yeah, they, they travel fast in
in culture.
Uh, IS there a good enough evidence to support
the existence of something like smartphone or social media
addiction? Because I mean, I've heard people talking about
that, and then something that really particularly irritates me
is that people always link it to dopamine and
then there's, there's always influencers on social media. Media
and the internet talking about dopamine addiction or that
every time you use your smartphone or you go
on social media you get the dopamine hit. I
mean, is, is there really any basis, uh, any
scientific basis to that?
No, no, not really. I mean again, but yeah,
I, I, I completely agree with you. So it's
fine because yes, you, you have been addicted by
dopamine or whatever. Uh, SO, yeah, this, this is,
I, I mean, you know, dopamine is, uh, I,
I, I'm a, I'm a, I, I work in
cultural revolution, so I don't want to enter in
the detail, but dopamine is a neurotransmitter, so you
cannot be addicted to a neurotransmitter. It's just something
that, you know, the level change whenever you do
something that is pleasurable or not. Uh, SO this
is the first point, when you say, when someone
say, OK, I'm addicted to dopamine or whatever, it's
just say, OK, let's not read the rest of
the article. Um, uh, THEN of course, uh, the
fact that we use smartphone and social media means
that they give us some form of, uh, uh,
reward, otherwise we would not use them. So, so
that probably is true. I, again, I, I don't
know really here the, the detail, but of course
there will be some increase in dopamine when we
do something on, on, uh, social media. The point
is that, uh, uh. To talk about, uh, you
know, addiction or about problematic behavior, this increase in
dopamine should be, for example, similar to what is
the increase that you have for activities for which
we use, uh, usually the term of addiction, drugs
or similar thing and when you look at this
in this way, it's completely uh another, another thing.
I mean, in general, the, the I, I think
generally it's problematic to. Move the, the, the, the
terminology of addiction to uh uh behavioral addiction. I
mean, people do it, uh. That I like obviously
the, the, the proper domain of the term addiction
is about, you know, drugs or alcohol, things that
there is some, some withdrawal, physical effort. This, this
you can use addiction, that's a problem. When you
talk about giving an addiction, my opinion is that
uh. It makes sense if the er behavior gets
problematic for everyone that go after a certain threshold.
So let me explain, let's leave aside any physical
effort or whatever, but we can say that heroin
is addictive, because if you start to use heroin,
er and if you go on for a while
for the, I don't know. I, I'm, I'm using
just a random number for the 90% of people,
this will create problems. So it's not, it's, it's,
it's generally problematic. Um, SO sometime for behavioral addition
this could make sense. I, I'm thinking about like,
uh, um, like betting in a, in a very
consistent way. I, I would think that if a
person. Bet, uh, money every, every day for, uh,
for a long period of time. This would necessarily,
at least for a big percentage of people, uh,
a problematic behavior. So I would call it, uh,
I, I would, I, I don't know, again, I'm
not an expert but I would accept that, OK,
can we, we can talk, we can use the
language of addition, this add something to our knowledge
of the, of the behavior. Going to the social
media, I think that for the this is not
the case. The majority of people have uh an
OK usage of social media. Of course there is
problematic. This doesn't mean that there is not problematic
use. There is some people use, uh, uh, maybe
they, they need like real, real, um. Real, uh,
uh, medical or, or, or, or psychological help, that's,
that's for sure, but uh it's not that the
majority of people that start to use social media
end up in a problematic situation. So in this
case I would not talk about addiction. That's why
when people use the term addiction, you know, like
sex addiction or shopping addiction, I, I think these
are kind of uh. You know, labeled for saying
something in a, in a funny way that maybe
describe the behavior of some people, but the, the
problem is not social media edition, the problem is
that these people that are. Addicted to social media
or shopping, whatever, have some, some other problem, but
the, the, while in the case of heroin and
maybe betting, these are problematic by itself, in this
case, they are not, so I will not use
the, the, uh, the term addiction and I think
this also is a bit of polluting the, the,
the conversation about the effect of social media because
you know. Mhm. So, yeah,
what do you make of proposals that we've seen
across the world, uh, for banning, uh, smart smartphones
from schools and prohibiting social. Media use for children
under 16, I mean, do you think that there's
any scientific evidence to support policies and measures like
that?
Yes, as I was saying before, the scientific evidence
is really Not, not there yet, uh, and I
would say, OK, let's hope that, you know, if
this thing happened, even if I'm not particularly in
support of this, maybe we will have some scientific
evidence, and, uh, you know, I hope in 5
years to talk about this, and I will answer
to this question, and I'm really happy in this
case to, uh, to change my mind with the,
uh, evidence that we have now about the effect.
I, I think, uh. Like 16 year old bands
can be more risky than, than, uh than um
beneficial. Um, OF course, uh, I'm not claiming that
we need to give, you know, smartphone to, to
primary school children and let them abandon and do
things. I don't think that the way is banning.
I think the way it should be a society
that uh accept in full what can be the,
the effect, the positive and the negative effect of
smartphone and social media usage and build, uh, structures
in society, in school, in family that make the
usage of social media, take the positive part and
not the, uh, and not the negative part, um.
Again, because a band can actually for, for some
teenager, I imagine that social media usage is really
important. Imagine, you know, uh marginalized communities or uh
it could be. More problematic for them than beneficial
for the rest of the people and then you
would do really damage to someone with a band
so I'm not particularly in favor, as I'm saying
we don't know too much so to me it
would be, I mean I would, I would, you
know, I, I, I would prefer that uh uh
the, the, the usage of smartphone is incremental with
age that should not start too early, um, but
uh this should be done, I think in a
different way, should be done in a society that
give you. Occasions to, you know, do something else
without prohibiting so you know, middle school kids should,
uh, not use too much the smartphone, not because
there is a law against that, but because they
have other things to do because adults people should
give the example of using it in a good
and moderate way again it's easy to say yes,
it's the kids that are the problem, so. Mm,
it's, it's difficult. It's, so I, I'm, I'm mostly
talking about what is a kind of a, a
common sense thing because we don't have much science
behind that, but, uh, people that pretend that there
is a science and in general I don't think
in, in very good faith. Oh, well, they, they
are probably in good faith from their point of
view, but, uh, um. You cannot say that we
have strong support for these uh these initiatives.
Yes, and I've heard some arguments made by people
who are against these kinds of bans that I
think are really important to consider. At least it's
not just some of the positive aspects of social
media like the ones you referred to there and
the fact that people can connect more easily with
other people and perhaps it's easier to get in
touch with people from different cultural backgrounds and have
those sorts of experiences. But also the fact that,
and these are the arguments that some people make
against the bans, the fact that it is important
even for children to acquire and develop social media
literacy, uh, online literacy, and also for them because
like it or not, social media are now part
of our lives, the lives of everyone. It's important
for children also to learn how to use them
properly. Even uh in the future for their future
in terms of professional development and so on, yes,
yeah, no, I, I, I agree definitely. I mean,
it's, it's at least unclear whether, you know, they're
banned until 16 year old and then a 16
year old what happened, they just, you know, it,
it could be even worse because then they have,
you know, the full access and they didn't, didn't
have any experience to build some knowledge, yeah, I,
I completely agree. Another aspect that is more practical.
I would this work? I mean, in, in, in,
in how, in how many days, uh, the, the
kids will find a way to, to fake the,
the, the age identity. I mean, it seems to
me like very, very, uh, but, but, OK, this,
let's not talk about that. It's not, uh, but,
but is a practical thing, but we see. But
yeah, I agree completely. Yeah, it's probably makes sense
to build incremental skills in a. In a, in
a, in a positive and controlled environment and say
like, OK, this is bad and you can do
it only at 160.
Uh, YEAH, I mean, I was laughing because I
was an adolescent in the 2000s when the people,
when the internet became more widespread, and I can
guarantee you that uh as young people we were
able to find ways around certain things.
Exactly, we, we, we all have this experience, so
yes, yes.
OK, so, uh, uh, I have two more questions
then. Uh, WHAT is your take then on communication
technologies? I mean, are they mostly good, mostly bad?
How, how should we deal with them?
Well, uh, that's, that's a, that's a hard question.
Uh, SO, um, We cannot say if they are
mostly good or mostly bad. The, the, the classic
thing is it depends how we use them, but
also I, I, I, there is also, I think,
a naive thing that say, OK, uh, they are
neutral and, uh, you know, it depends what we
do, but I don't think they are neutral. I,
I think that uh. Each communication technologies gives some
kind of affordances, gives some kind of, and, and
even different social media have different algorithms that you,
you use them for different things so you use
uh uh LinkedIn to promote your work and Facebook
to show the last uh dinner that you did
uh. Television was one too many, media, uh, visual
radio was one too many, but without visual, social
media are 1 to 1 or many to many.
So uh it's not that. They are neutral. Each
different communication media have different features, um. And I
don't even think that I can say if they
are good or bad. The point is, as I
was saying probably at the beginning. Each new communication
media has communication uh technology. Each new media have
different affordance, different features, and then there is a
co-adaptation process of the society that tend to use
this in a way that uh. Up to a
point serves the society. So, uh, in general, new,
uh, new communication technologies give more possibility of, uh,
communicating this thing it's potentially at least uh positive.
Then of course, depends how we use the photos
is, how the society adapt to this, uh, to
me. Like now it seems, seems, uh, seems crazy
to say that, you know, internet is, uh, it
was a positive development, but to me it clearly
is. I mean, we, we, we give us for
granted the fact that, you know, we, we are
doing something that until uh uh 30, maybe years
ago, 20 even was, was impossible. Now it's, it's
normal and, and. This is increasing, uh, the possibility
like we, we, we, we take for granted a
lot of, uh, uh, a lot of innovation, a
lot of possibilities that uh uh to me are,
are uh positive so, so it's not that technologies
are positive or negative and not even neutral technologies
I was saying, have, have affordances and uh. Um,
OPEN the new spaces and it's up to the
society to use them in the, in the better
ways and, and my point is that whatever people
would say, I think that the, uh, the net,
um. Balance of what happened with digital communication technologies
is, uh, is positive. We, we seem crazy. I
mean, it's, it's, uh, uh, I, I was, uh,
I was, uh, this was probably the, the dominant
idea like 20 years ago or something, and I,
I found recently a book of, uh, 20 years
ago that you would, about 15 years ago that
was like uh Internet will not solve all the
problem, but it's not, uh, which really now seems
like, of course, because they not solve the problem,
but because we really change our perspective on, on
the effort but uh um it's, it's, um, I
think there are many things that we take for
granted that are, that are very important.
Mhm. And so my last question and then in
part, we've already explored this question, but I want
to get, I guess a broader uh or a
more detailed answer from you. Uh, WHAT do you
think are the effects of alarmist narrative surrounding social
media and communication technologies more generally? I mean, earlier
when we talked about the supposed correlation. Between social
media use and mental health outcomes we mentioned the
fact that the sort of monocausal explanations, I mean,
are not good scientifically, but also they leave other
possible factors aside that could be considered and tackled.
So what other effects of these alarmist narratives do,
do you think we can have?
Yeah, yeah, that's a, that's an excellent question to
conclude, and I mean, it's also like a bit
like the chapter of my book this because usually
people kind of tell me, well, you are defending,
uh, Elon Musk or the Zuckerberg, which is unfortunately,
as you see, I'm here in my kitchen, yeah,
I'm not on some, some private some
mention,
yeah, no, there, there's no mention. It's, it's a
little kitchen. Treto is very nice, but, uh, no.
Uh, OK, I decided, so yeah, the, the point
is that uh I think that this negative alarmistic
narrative can have. Negative effect by itself. So what
one could say, OK, well they're not strong supported,
but still we try to do better. The point
is that I don't think that this is the
case. So you, you, you already gave the example
of, of, uh, mental health, but for example, let's
go back at the, uh, misinformation case. So 11
aspect that we already, uh, discussed a bit before
is that uh if you focus on this. Cause
or or presumed cause of, of uh various events
you are not really looking at more uh possibly
important structural causes, social problem, economical problem, cultural problem
you just say, OK, people uh vote uh populist
parties because of misinformation. That's, that's, uh, that's a
problem with this narrative. There are also other, for
example, in the case of misinformation, more, more specific
problem. One, I think that this narrative contributed in
uh a general loss in trust of uh media
and institution. I, I, even in this case, I
would not say that this is the only cause.
I, I, I would not go for a monocausal
explanation, but if it. Is one of the cause
if people keep on repeating, you know, social media,
uh, it's just a lot of misinformation and then
we observed that there are now some experiments that
try to actually test these things. So if you
tend to participate that, uh, um. That's the, the,
the, the everything that the misinformation is very widespread,
they will tend to trust less uh less also
reliable news. This is also a problem for what
we said before, so we say that the, the,
the problem with, with social influence is not too
much that we are too, too gullible, but that,
that we do not change our mind when we
should. So if this negative narrative of misinformation make
everybody more skeptical, this is probably not the right
direction. We would like people to be open to
to uh to. Reliable information like people use less
and less news, uh, social media, at least some
of them try to avoid the to, uh, propose
political news for the fear of being involved in
some misinformation thing and again the result is that
people are, uh, less informed. So in general I
think there is a lot of uh uh. Problems
that are so that the beside the fact that
they are not uh uh empirically uh strongly supported
this narrative have uh um some, some drawback by
itself and again even if we want, as, as
I want, if you even if you want to
be critical about say social media about some aspect
if, if we have this overall not robust narrative,
we're not really looking at the, at the, um.
At the specific aspect of the things that we
could change. I, I, I see you had two
minutes for talking about something that I didn't talk
in the book because I didn't want artificial intelligence
because I said, OK, let's just not touch this
because negative narrative, it's, it's, it's complicated, but uh
I, I was finishing to, to work at the
book and was the, the time in which there
were this big um narrative about the existential AI
risk for humanity and that, you know, there will
be AGI and then people will uh humanity will
uh will get extinct or and so, so you
have in this case like a very big negative
alarmistic narrative and what I found uh interesting in
a way that it was supported. A lot by
the same people like the big guy working in
AI and I was wondering like why, I mean
they, they don't have any, any interest in supporting
this narrative, but then I was thinking about this
and I was saying, OK, but, but they do
because if we are focusing about these, you know,
things that maybe will not happen or maybe they
will in 50 years, we are not looking how
they are getting the money, where are the data
that they're using, so again, I think this big
narrative are in a way. Paradoxically going in a
good direction for, for the, the, the, the, the
companies or the social media. So it's, it's also
this uh this is a a risk. It's I
think it's much more productive to focus on a
realistic thing and change what we can actually change.
Mhm.
So let's, let's end on that note, Doctor Rerbi,
and the book is again Technopanicco. I will be
leaving a link to it in the description below
and apart from the book, where can people find
you and your work on the internet?
Yes, again, I, I, I try to do one,
soup stack in Italian which is, uh, which because
I, I was trying to focus a bit on
the, on the Italian audience, so there is this,
uh, it's called chinqueliaima which means, uh, 5, links
every week. In which I try to put uh
these links to this kind of topic we are
talking about and also some uh cultural evolution things.
So this is something that can be interesting. Again,
the idea here is also related to the fact
that uh uh if you have access to all
this information. Curation is kind of important, so having
someone that would give you, OK, just read these
five things for the work that you do, so
try to, you know, give some, some curated aspect.
It's, it's getting, uh, more and more important and
more access do you have? And then I am
in the, you know, the usual social media.
Well, and, uh, as I told you yesterday, I
mean the day before we recorded the interview, uh,
I'm going to put up your book on my
list of my favorite nonfiction books of 2025, and
I'm maybe I can influence a few people to
learn Italian because I will also
have another,
I will also. I have another Italian book on
the list. This year two Italian books, so I
mean maybe I, I might influence some people to
learn another language. That,
that, that would be good. I mean, I, I,
I, I translated it. Uh, I have a first
draft of an English translation. Uh, HOPEFULLY there will
be an English version maybe, maybe next year, but,
uh, let's see. People can start to learn Italian
and then, and then, yeah, I, I,
I think that, I think that's a good thing.
OK,
OK, so Doctor Aservi, thank you very much for
coming on the show again. It's been fascinating to
talk with you.
Thank you very much. Thank you to you. Bye,
everybody.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.